Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Zion Lights. She is a
science communicator, the author of the Ultimate Guide to
Green Parenting and only a moment, founder of Emergency
Reactor, former editor of the Hourglass newspaper and former
spokesperson for Extinction Rebellion. And today we're going to
talk a little bit about extinction rebellion, climate change,
clean energy, ethical Parenting. So Z and welcome to
the show, it's a pleasure to everyone.
Hi, thanks for having me.
So tell us first about extinction rebellion. So, uh
how did you get involved with them? And perhaps,
uh I mean, tell us a little bit about
uh that bit of your story and then we
might get a little bit into why you left
the organization. And what are your general thoughts about
it?
Well, I was involved in quite a lot of
different environmental groups from quite a young age. Um
BECAUSE I, I really cared about, you know, deforestation
and climate change and all these different issues. Um
But I became very disillusioned with them particularly because
um I felt that they were putting feelings before
facts in a lot of instances. And, um, yeah,
I ended up leaving numerous different groups actually and
just sort of going my own way. Um, SO
winning six year rebellion was founded here in, in
Britain initially. I just, I ignored them. You know,
I thought it's just going to be the same
old thing. Um, YOU know, I'm, I'm done doing
this, I've been doing, I was doing this 10
years ago, but they, they were very popular here.
They're very successful. They, you know, initially they had
really good media coverage. They had a lot of
journalists on side, you know, they were, the messaging
was ok. I was listening to what they were
saying it was, it was quite positive actually at
the beginning the movement. Um So I went to
my local group, my local chapters to see what
it was like. And to be honest, I felt
that it wasn't for me. So I kind of
turned up had a look and I, it was
a huge meeting. There were like 100 people there.
Um AT least really interested in how they could
get involved. Um And at that point, you know,
they were doing a lot more fun actions. It
wasn't all blocking roads, they were quite creative. There
was a lot of art, I thought it was
quite positive movement. Um But I still sort of
backed away and then I got, um, people had
seen that I turned up and they put me
in touch with, um, the founders basically kind of
the core organizational group, not just a local chapter.
And they said, look, we've seen your TED talk
on stargazing. Would you be a spokesperson for us?
And I kind of said, well, I've just been
step, you know, just sort of stepped away actually.
Um, I don't think it's for me and they
said, well, we need someone who can do the
communication and you'll have big TV slots. And I
thought, well, if I don't do it, um, you
know, they'll, they'll just have someone that doesn't represent
the science doing it. So I, I agreed to
do it. Um, ON that basis, I, and I
did go down and, and join the, um, the
Waterloo uh blockade where they, they, they blocked four
or five different main roads in London. Um, I
went down to have a look at that and
it, you know, again, it was very positive movement.
There was a lot of, um, good energy on
the streets, there was a lot of public support
which changed later. Um, SO onto the reasons for
leaving. Um, YOU know, I, I basically watched them
kind of spiral into a sort of doom, you
know, a doomed spiral, a very negative apocalyptic view
of the world that I would say that's not
how they started out. Um, BUT I think those
founders who had those opinions were pushing those views
more and more and some of them were spokespeople.
So I was then put in a difficult position
of having to discuss things like the end of
the world, you know, which I didn't want to
have to. And I, and I would say, you
know, on TV, I would say, wow, you know,
that that's not true. And maybe we shouldn't have
said that, but it, it, it, it increasingly became
apparent that, uh, my values didn't align with the
values of this group. So after about a year
of doing the kind of TV slots, I felt
that I should distance myself. Um And actually it
was right after the, um, they did a train,
a train action where they, they stood on several
different trains in Britain in the underground actually on
the tube. Um, AND some people were injured, they
were pulled off the trains and that was kind
of where I went. This is, you know, and
when I spoke, I spoke to some of these
people about that action, they said they really had
fallen for this idea that it doesn't matter if
we get attacked, it doesn't matter if we fall
off the trains, it doesn't matter if people are
late for work or lose their jobs. Climate change
is that big a deal. And that's where I
felt that they'd gone from being quite evidence based
to quite cultish. And I think this can, you
know, this can happen with any large group actually.
I think sometimes they move so quickly. Um, PEOPLE'S
common sense doesn't catch up with their feelings. So,
anyway, I, yeah, so I left because my values
didn't align with them anymore.
But what do you mean when you say that
over time they developed a sort of a apocalyptic
view of the world. What does that mean?
So, honestly, in the beginning it was so positive,
you know, that we had good press coverage groups
was sprung up all around the world, you know,
and I felt like finally we can talk about
climate change in a sensible way, we can talk
about solutions. You know, I wanted to talk about
things like nuclear power um uh which I couldn't
do actually. But um yeah, I just noticed that,
for example, there was a youth week, there was
a very active youth wig of exus rebellion, a
lot of young people who are concerned about climate.
Now, for me, you know, um I would like
to see those people have a really positive future,
the best, the best future we can give them.
And so I would talk to them about, you
know, what are the solutions? How do we implement
them? But they were very much being fed um
a different story line by one of the, one
of the founders actually, I would say, um and
his followers who would say your future's been taken
away from you. Um The world will end in
12 years. Um THIS is, this is the fault
of, of the current generation. Um, um, AND they've
let you down and they should be punished even.
Um, AND it's quite extreme. I thought it was
quite extreme. But when I was speaking to the
young, younger group I saw, yeah, increasingly they just
became unreachable. You know, I started out having really
good positive conversations and then they, the next time
I saw them they were ranting about this is
all, you know, this is all your fault and
we're gonna take you down and blah, blah. And
it was quite, it was the Greta line as
well. Cos Greta was saying at the same time,
you've taken my future and I was thinking you
guys have one of the best, uh you know,
some of the best opportunities in the world, actually
very, very wealthy, live in a high income country,
you know, um you have good education, you have
healthcare, there's, if anything you could be talking about
solutions and then they would say, well, that's, that's
climate denial, that's climate denial. That's not recognizing how
bad the problem is. But then I would say,
well, if it's that bad and we're doomed, why
do anything? But there was no reaching them, there
was no reaching them. And when I saw that
spiral and I mean, it really was quite extreme.
There was a lot of people in those groups
self harming, for example, they did an action um
in London, I think it was at Westminster. I
can't remember where it was. I mean, they did
multiple whether they were, they were naked uh or,
or naked from the waist up and were fully
naked. And there were photos that came in from
one of those actions that are, you know, they
were sent around all of us before they go
to press and you could see just, you know,
cuts on their arms. I thought this was really
extreme and they were, they just, you know, the
media team selected the photos where you couldn't see
the cuts. And I, and I would say to
some of the the leaders, some of the the
older people in the group and some of the
founders, you know, we shouldn't be encouraging this, these
people need help and they would say no, they're
having an appropriate reaction to the climate emergency, which
I don't agree with. Actually, I think that anxiety
would exist whether or not climate change existed, you
know, that anxiety is a problem that, that a
lot of young people are having. And if anything,
there were people encouraging that in, in the groups
and the more I saw that kind of doom
ridden, you know, uh narrative um and, and slide
into more extreme actions like the train really just
upset a lot of people, we went from having
a lot of support to just and angering everybody.
Um Yeah, I realized that somehow the balance had
shifted and we weren't, we weren't a positive group
anymore that wanted to see good change in the
world. We were just, um, yeah, about apocalypse and,
and doom and, and to me, you know, what's
the point of any, if you really believe that?
What's the point of doing anything? Why go block
a road if you think the world will end
tomorrow, what's the point? But I couldn't get through
to people with that logic. So I, I left
so when it comes to making people pay more
attention to climate change, which of course is one
of the biggest issues, if not the biggest global
issue that we have to deal with uh at
the moment and in the near future, I mean,
uh I get to some extent, I get why
would some people get desperate and uh do those
sorts of things that you described there to get
people's attention? But since it usually has such a
negative impact on people in general, what they think
about these movements, these groups, these activists, what would
you say are perhaps or would be better ways
of trying to get a more positive result when
it comes to really trying to drive home the
message that people really do have to pay attention
to climate.
The thing is that, that work has been done
and that was something that extinction rebellion was good
at, at the same time as kind of finance
the future. And Greta's work, which was making people
aware, but that isn't enough. Most people don't have
a magic button that they can push and fix
a problem. All it's done is given them a
lot of anxiety. I'm not saying they shouldn't be
made aware. But I think when you talk to
people about the problems, you should always also, you
know, include solutions. I think that's really important. Otherwise
you're just, you know, putting a huge problem in
someone's lap and then walking away. Um DID that
help climate change? No, it didn't actually. Um YOU
know, I think actually hyper focus on climate change
is now a problem and that we should be
really hyper focusing on what are the solutions to
emissions and to still issues like deforestation, which are
a big problem. Um You know, and lots of
other issues that have have been pushed to the
side because climate change has taken all the space.
And now if you look at you want, if
you want to do work in this area, it's
all about climate and you think, well, it is
a really important issue, but there are also lots
of other important issues in the world that are
now being neglected, like, you know, basic sanitation in,
in, in some low income countries or access to
certain technologies. Um And that sadly, you know, what,
what it means is that because of that focus,
a lot of the funding is just in the
climate space and it's hard to get it now
in other areas. And I have spoken to people
of other groups say, you know, minority groups, if
you like who've said this has all been sucked,
this, all this money is being sucked up by
this one? Cause um and you know, the problem,
the problem that I see with it is that
the, the cause is not focus on solutions so
you can keep banging the same message. Fix it,
fix it. We'll block a road if you don't
fix it. Um But they refuse to talk about
the things that actually could fix it. No one
wants to talk about desalination, nuclear energy. I mean,
all right, nuclear energy is much more popular now.
But when I started out in this work a
few years ago, I mean, I was really heavily
attacked as an environmentalist for coming out and speaking
out about nuclear energy has really changed a lot.
There was not a day that went by where
I didn't get all a shill or hate mail.
All of that stock now. Completely stopped. So it's
changed a lot. Um Because actually when you start
talking about solutions, people are really keen, they want
to hear, you know, what can we do? And
in a way the, the environmental movement has lied
to people, uh, you know, because they themselves have
believed nonsense. Which is that? Oh, well, if you
just, you know, um, turn off the tap while
you're brushing your teeth or make sure you turn
off the light when you leave the room, all
the problems will be fixed. Well, yeah, sure. We
shouldn't waste resources. I'm not disagreeing, but I don't
think anyone really would disagree with that. Most of
us are turning off the lights because it costs
us money if we don't. Um, BUT frankly, we've
been misled for decades, um, being told these are
the solutions that will solve the problem. Well, actually
quite a lot of us are doing that. I
wrote an entire book on how to do that
before. I kind of frankly just looked at the
map and went, even if everybody does this, it
is not going to really reduce our emissions significantly
and nowhere near how much they need to, we
need a big solution and that's clean energy and
that's where I think the problem is where um
those groups have not kind of talked about that
and, and I've helped to talk about it and
lots of people are now doing that, but there
are lots of other things that we should be
talking about, like desalination in countries that are going
to suffer more water scarcity. Although actually, we're having
problems here with that. Um YOU know, lots of
different uh solutions that are out there. And I
think if we can, you know, push the narrative
into that, you know, take some of the funding
away from talking about climate change and put it
into fusion technology. For example, these are, these are
really big solutions that could, could change everybody's life
kind of overnight. Um As many new technologies do,
but instead we're still just hyper focusing on what
you do makes the biggest difference, you know, um
small incremental changes and, and yeah, small changes can
make a difference, you know, changing from a, a
diesel car to an electric car that does make
some difference. That that is an incremental improvement and
that's something that someone can do. Um But still,
even if we all do that, um that electricity
comes from somewhere comes from the grid, right? And
in the UK, that's still 60% fossil fuels. So
again, nobody's, there's no kind of nuance in the
debate. The slogans were very popular um in extinction
rebellion. I helped to popularize them. Um But now
I realize that, you know, they're problematic because they,
they've boiled things down. So they simplified them so
much when actually there's a really complex problem that
involves many different um areas that need to be
addressed, but also many different communities around the world
who don't get a say who and who actually,
you know, many of these people in low income
countries are the people who will most be impacted
by climate change. We need to be looking at
what do they need, you know, do they need
to build sea walls, for example, do they need
to, to help with flood risk or better models
for predicting weather which you know, something that is
happening. A I is helping with that. Um But
is there money going into that in terms of
climate initiatives? No, no, it's not. It's it's going
into people just speaking about the same things again
and again, if you look at the sheer number
of, of, of panels and things that happen on
this and then people patting themselves on the back.
Yeah, we had a great awareness panel about climate
change. Awareness isn't the problem, the awareness is there,
but awareness is not gonna do all that much
unless it reaches the right people who understand what
the right solutions are. And I still speak with
politicians, you know, all over the world, not just
here who don't understand what solutions are because they're
not very science literate, but mostly the messaging hasn't
reached them. So they're just, they're just stuck at
the stage of panic or kind of going well,
let's ignore it because it's a big insurmountable problem
and it's not insurmountable. Actually, we have all the
technology we need to fix it.
So I I want to ask you more about
the potential solutions with the focus on nuclear energy
and also uh some other solutions that we usually
hear from activists that perhaps have some limitations. But
just before we get into that, as far as
we know, according to the best cli climate science
that we have and the best models. What would
be some of the worst potential consequences of climate
change for human society and the planet as a
whole.
So the worst, I mean, the worst model, you
know, there's a lot, there's a lot that we
don't know, but we know that we will have
more unpredictable weather, more extreme weather we're seeing so
of this in some parts of the world where
there are, for example, more hurricanes, things like that,
but it's very hard to actually tie them to
climate change. All we can say is that these
are now more common occurrences, unpredictable weather is more
now common. Um uh Heat waves are now more
common periods of flooding in all, you know, all
around the world are more common and that is
what the models predicted. So we can say, we
said this would happen and now look it's happening
even though a lot of people say, well, you
can't directly tie it. Um And, but actually, you
know, once we get more data, people will be
scientists will be able to start tying it and
say, well, this is really out of, you know,
out of sync with what they were used to.
But certainly we can say with um with climate
change, as we used to call it global warming,
which I think is kind of the more accurate
term, but I I understand why it was changed.
Um BECAUSE then people expect only a fluctuation of
heat, but anyway. Um, WE have seen that, you
know, we've seen that even in Britain, um, year
on year, record highs and yeah, occasionally there'll be
a dip but we're not measuring weather, we're measuring
climate, which is a period of time, which is
a lot, something, a lot of people don't understand.
So, over a period of time it is incrementally
getting, getting warmer and that is tied to our
activities. I'm not even saying that's about your or
my daily activities, which I think is where the
messaging has gone wrong from an environmentalist kind of
pointing fingers saying this was you, it is our
the entire lifestyle of the world or at least
the world that lives doesn't live in poverty. It
is a consequence and that is measured in multiple
different ways. Um You know, and that, that science
is very solid and, you know, if you know
anything about scientists, there's a lot of arguments about
scientific consensus, right? There's a lot of, I mean,
that's what it is. They argue about the data,
you know, the really tiny pedantic bits of information
until they can reach a consensus. Now for a
lot of science, you know, it doesn't reach high
numbers, you know, even some vaccines are 60% scientific
consensus, you know, and I'm not saying people shouldn't
have vaccines, I'm completely pro vaccination. But, and that's
something that I used to work on incomes. But
um with nuclear, you know, with, um with climate
change, you've got the IPCC report. So the Intergovernmental
Panel on climate change, it's an independent body. Lots
of scientists work on that, not just climate scientists,
but you know, um all kinds of oceanographers, geologists,
people looking in at their fields. So what's what
changes can we see and how do these all
map up together to show a whole of what's
happening to the world planet is warming, it is
being caused by humans. But the good news is
the report that they put out in 2018, the
1.5 warming report, it also says we can fix
this. And here's how and well, the problem is
that everybody's focused on the bit where they've said
guys, this could be really bad and they're not
saying it will be really bad. There's, you know,
there's leeway and they do use some of the
worst modeling. So it might not be. But eventually,
if the problem continues, it will still get to
be that bad, right? So they're saying it all
of these problems will happen. But um according to
what, what the data tells us, but there are
also, there's room for change, there's room to, to
um you know, reduce some of those impacts and
basically it comes down to reducing emissions. It's not
that complicated, but it's not about just you and
I turning off the lights. It's about where the
power for those lights comes from, which is where
the messaging has got lost, I think, and that's
not all of it, you know, some of it
is that we're talking about electricity there and there's
still um you know, cars on the road and,
and uh uh uh you know, gas boilers and
things, but, but actually a lot of shifts are
happening, you know, in the, in the UK, a
lot of people are buying electric vehicles and I
think one in 10 vehicles now is an electric
vehicle. Um AND people are switching over to heat
pumps and things like that. So I think the
electrification will also happen. But ironically, a lot of
environmentals are against electrification because they think we should
use less and not just have these kind of
um changes where we maintain the same lifestyles. But
I don't think, I don't think that that's the
right approach. I don't think people will give up
those lifestyles and I don't think they should have
to either. You know, I think people will always
favor convenience. So what we need to do is
make it convenient and cheap to have clean power.
Now, that's where nuclear comes in, right. If all
of the world or at least the kind of
developing world at the time had decarbonised the way
France did 19 eighties build 50 plus reactors. Um
OVER a period of about a decade completely de
decarbonise their grid and they built some renewables too.
Um If everywhere had done that, we wouldn't, we
wouldn't have had that 1.5 warming report from scientists
saying this is how bad it is. And, and
the point I was making earlier about the consensus
that report has a 99% consensus, that's a huge
amount. So, yeah, you can find 1% of scientists
who contribute to that report, who will say no.
Actually, I disagree and I think it's just, you
know, solar layers or whatever, um whatever arguments they
have and that's fine. You know, that's, that's good
actually, because if it was 100% you might think
why is there no one disagreeing? Where is the
descent? This is how science works, right? You hash
it out. But 99% um, consensus is a really
high number that, you know, it's like, uh 99
you know, you have nine, you have 100 engineers
and 99 of them say don't get in that
car, maybe not engineers, mechanics don't get in that
car because, you know, it's got really high likelihood
that it will crash if you get in it.
And then 1% says no, one person says no,
it's, it's fine. Um, I would, you know, maybe
that one person's right in a, in a, you
know, in a really small, there's a really small
chance that they are but you, most people would
listen to the 99 and that's, I think that's,
it's really important to talk about the consensus because
of that. But also to remember that same report
has the same consensus for what the mitigation strategies
are. And that's where nuclear power comes in actually.
And that's, you know, not been implemented as quickly
as it could have been. Uh SOME, a lot
of countries in the east are doing it. But
in the west we have, I think fallen for
environmental rhetoric for so long, we've made it difficult
to build it here now, which is ridiculous because
you want to solve the problem. That's one of
the biggest solutions that we have.
Mhm So just before we get into nuclear power,
just for the audience to understand a little bit
better. Uh Some of these terms, I mean, because
sometimes people use the term clean energy and uh
it's a bit unclear in particular contexts and the
way that sometimes people communicate about it, what that
really means. So what types of uh energy sources
fall under the rubric of a clean energy?
So, yeah, you're right. It's complicated. I tend to
go by the our world in data analysis um
which you know, anyone can go and look at
on their website because it's very thorough the way
they've thought about it. Um And they're looking at,
they're looking at emissions, but they're also looking at
things like land footprint. So you've got on the
clean side, you've got solar wind, hydro and nuclear.
Um THEN under fossil fuels, you've got gas, coal.
Um And actually I would say that gas ga,
I think actually, again, there's a problem with lumping
them together as fossil fuels because gas is probably,
you know, gas compared to coal. If you choose,
if you have to choose one, choose gas, it
is much cleaner. It's not in the clean energy
side, but for some countries where the choice is
just gas or coal, they should absolutely have gas.
I think again, this kind of western rhetoric influencing
other nations saying, oh, you shouldn't be burning. Um
ANY of these fuels is, is ridiculous. They are
not able to, to, to leap ahead and have
clean energy. But I I do think there's a
lot of confusion with people use clean synonymously with
renewables. And I think that's a problem because renewables,
technically it's wind, solar, hydro and biomass biomass is
not clean and should not be included in that.
But actually if you look at um countries different
kind of environmental top targets around the world, they
c biomass. So a lot of the time they'll
say, hey, we have 60% renewable energy. When you
look at the figures, 50% of it is, is
biomass. That's really problematic. I mean, we, we have
it here as well. Um AND we count it
as a climate solution and it, and it gets
funded and subsidies when actually, you know, it's uh
it's polluting very polluting. So it's not, it's not
clean, but it's classed as renewable. So we shouldn't
use renewables synonymously or renewables are all created, you
know, like fossil fuels, they're d they're different. So,
um, hydropower is extremely reliable. So I like to
talk about reliable, clean energy. In which case, you
just narrow it down to nuclear and hydro, hydro
is great. Right. But it's geographically dependent that everyone
can have a lot of hydropower. It also has
more risks than nuclear power, which a lot of
people don't believe. And I'd urge them to go
and look up the Bir Dam disaster or any
dam disaster really. And they'll say, oh, well, it
doesn't, you know, displace people the way nuclear. Yes,
it does. It completely flattens everything in its area,
you know, um and has harmed a lot of
people but that I'm not saying that we shouldn't
build it. Um I just think it's interesting that
people don't protest it, they don't tend to protest
it the way they protested nuclear for a long
time. Um Yeah. So the, the definitions I use
are the, our world in data uh figures because
they've really crunched the numbers and, and, and come
out with that. But also it's again, it's in
the IPCC report, they say you need, they say
to decarbonize, uh we need a combination of nuclear
renewables and there's no other way to do it.
And that is actually, um if you look at
all the industrialized nations in the world that have
been able to decarbonise which to reach over 70
or 80% clean energy mix in their grid. Uh
They haven't been able to do it without a
combination of nuclear and renewables. Even the countries that
have a lot of hydropower, uh, like Sweden still
use some nuclear, although they don't need as much
as other countries.
So when it comes to nuclear energy specifically, what
would you say are perhaps some of the most
common myths and misconceptions because sometimes the way people
talk about nuclear energy, it seems like a boogeyman
or something like that.
I think it's changing a lot. But, um, there
are a lot of ingrained old ideas. Um, WHICH
is, yeah, you know, that it's, it's not safe,
which isn't true that the waste is like, really
dangerous, which isn't true. I mean, technically, yes, the
waste is dangerous but so is medical waste. Um,
YOU know, it's well managed is the main thing
and it's never killed anyone. Um, WHEREAS, you know,
fossil fuel waste is being extraordinary in this atmosphere.
So, yeah, those are probably the main ones. But
now I think actually the conversation shifted when I
started out in this work years ago, those were
the main arguments. Now, people seem to have moved
forward that, you know, I think a lot of
the information's out there and people have gone, ok,
maybe we were wrong on those things. So they
have different arguments now, which is, takes a long
time to build and it's expensive. Um, NOW it
can take a long time to build. Absolutely. Um,
BUT the reason for that is because of regulations
and other problems, not because of the technology. So,
if you look in South Korea, other parts of
the East, um United Arab Emirates, they're building them
in, you know, four or five years, new reactors
can be built really quickly. Um, WHEREAS I actually
saw a study recently that said if we try
to build uh an Apr 1000, which is South
Korean reactor, we tried to build it here in
the UK. It wouldn't even pass, pass the basic
planning regulations for about seven years because it is
so strict. But the regulations are more strict than
for building a coal firepower station. That's how ridiculous
it is. So these myths have had a real
impact on real life and so it's kind of
a perpetuating cycle because people say it takes too
long to build and then they, they protest it
and it takes even longer to build because, and
that's happening here at size. Well, c uh because
they um the environmental groups are taking size world
to court saying your environmental standards aren't good enough.
It's actually the corpus said that's not true. And
you know, but now it's gone through an appeal
process but it slows everything down, but mostly it
costs a lot of money. So it becomes more
expensive. It doesn't have to be expensive. So those
are, they are. And they are myths, I would
say, you know, they, if you just look at
it on a sur surface level. Yeah. In the
west, some of, some of the countries in the
west in the UK is, it is expensive to
build them and they do take a long time,
but that's not inherent to the technology. So we
need to really have some reform in the planning
process there. Um, AND like reregulate nuclear, as I
like to say, um other myths, I mean, I've
heard some ridiculous myths over the years. I think
a lot of them have died a slow death,
which is great. Uh The funniest one I ever
heard was that nuclear energy is sexist because it's
like a hard energy and men like it. I
know how ridiculous but that, you know, some people
really believe that and they'll say wind and solar
are natural because it's the elements uh which I
think is funny because what's more natural than the
atom actually if you want to use that logic.
But anyway, it's not a logical argument. So we
don't need to talk about it, but that's the
funniest one I've ever heard.
Do you think that when it comes to nuclear
energy, we should consider a a and of course,
I am not sure if we would think about
this as a limitation and this is not a
criticism of nuclear energy itself or nuclear power. But
do you think that we should consider perhaps the
availability of uranium or not.
Um, YEAH, we should think about uranium, you know,
where we get the reserves from. Um, A lot
of them come from Kazakhstan. Canada has a lot
of Australia has a lot. Um, THERE'S no immediate
shortage. I just think it's a bit weird that
the people who say it's going to run out,
you know, it's going to run out in, in
whatever, 4000 years are the same people who are
saying there won't be a planet 4000 years. I
always think that's a strange thing. You know, there
won't be a habitable planet because they think like
will be extinct. Life will be extinct. Um, BUT
I've seen, I mean, I've seen people crunch the
numbers on this. Um What is view is one
of my go tos but Nick Turan who's crunched
on the numbers and he said if we use
breeder reactors, we've got 6 billion years worth of
uranium. So it really, again, it depends on, it's
not just about reserves, it's about how they're used,
but I still think it's just, you know, it's
a silly argument. It's like the whole peak oil.
Do you remember that the peak oil we're hitting
peak oil? Did, did that happen or did we
find new reserves? In fact, we increasingly find better
technologies for finding new reserves or for, for, for
using, um, for using our resources better? Actually, we're
really good at doing that. And with nuclear, you
can recycle, right? Which very few countries do, which
is unfortunate. But that's another thing that a little
bit of uranium goes a long, long ways is
what um I often tell people, you know, en
energy density is really important. Um So, no, we're
not going to run out of it any time
soon. But I would say that even if, even
if you did say I've calculated the numbers and
I'm sure that without interventions, without finding more, we've
got 1000 years, I really hope that we have
better energy, you know, electricity generation sources in 1000
years. I would hope that we have fusion and
I know that's a big hope, but I can't
imagine that our progress would stall that much. I
mean, I think there'd have to be a really
big significant event to stop. You know, if you
look at what we have now compared to 40
years ago, mobile phones A I internet and then
40 years before that, it's really rapid change. We're
in a real kind of technological era. I would
expect there should be something, something better out there.
And I, and I think nuclear is great, you
know, don't get me wrong. But um yeah, I,
I think it's a silly argument
and about uh renewable energy because sometimes people, particularly
activists talk about the different kinds of renewable energy
as, as a sort of a panacea, right? And,
but what are the limitations here in terms of
the extent to which we can or could rely
on renewable sources of energy to tackle climate change.
So, I mean, people have different opinions on this.
We're in the realm of opinion now, this is
not representing uh solid data because there isn't any,
it's very, you know, it's, it's completely variable because
for example, in Britain, this is not a good
place to have a lot of solar farms. It
is not a very sunny country. I mean, it's
spring now and we're lucky if we get any
sunshine. Um, AND that's, that's, that's consistent. Um But
then at the same time, even in, um, you
know, some of the sunniest countries and in places
like borne where they've built a lot of, um,
solar power. It's still not, it's not, but it's
not helping much with the grid and in the
summer it might, you know. So, all right, here's
an example. We, it's really windy here at the
moment, ridiculously, windy gale force winds, things blowing across
the garden. Um And because of that, we suddenly
got a huge surge in wind power. All the
articles in the reporting are saying, look at this,
Britain's got all this wind power, we're gonna be
wind, we're gonna be powered by wind in the
future. All these journalists are missing the point that
it's not normally this windy, you can't store it
for when it's not windy. And I know that
sounds really ridiculously simple. But that is the, that
is the stage of communication we're at with a
lot of these people. So, yeah, it's fine to
have it because at the moment it's powering the
grid and we're hardly use, we're using like 4%
gas, which is really unusual for us. So it
is good. But because the storage capability isn't there,
it doesn't matter tomorrow or next week or for
the rest of the year when it isn't very
windy or isn't very sunny. And so what I'm
trying to say is it's quite limited. It's not,
it's not an abundant energy source, it's limited. Now,
a lot of environmentalists know this and they will
say, why can't we live with intermittent, you know,
occasional energy. And I've know, I know environmentalists who've
said I have panels on my roof and when
I use what they supply and when they're not
supplying, I don't, I don't use anything and that's
fine if they, you know, don't mind that they
miss their favorite TV program or whatever. But we
need to be a bit more realistic that we
need to keep, you know, fridges running, right. We
need to keep the lights working if you need
to need to, we don't want to go back
to using candles at night because your, your panels
um because you've run out of stored solar energy.
So the, the issue really is that the storage
isn't very good. Now, 15 years ago, I was
a big advocate for, for wind and solar. And
I would say if we put more money into
it, if countries actually invested in it around the
corner, we've got, we're gonna have amazing battery storage.
And I think it's really sad that people are
making those same arguments today because the fact is
that in 15 years that hasn't happened, the storage
has improved somewhat, but you're not going to change
the basic fundamental laws of physics, right? That is,
that is as good as the storage is gonna
get. And actually we now have a case study
study which is Germany. So Germany is a really
good case study in answer to your question, which
is how much can a can a country rely
on this? All right, industrialized nation, you know, very
successful nation, uh high quality of life. They've done
really good stuff at, at reducing emissions by insulating
houses and EVs and like, you know, all the
kind of measures that you can do on the
ground. They've done that and, and also people are
very good at, you know, that taking shorter showers.
So they, they've helped with the individual change, the
behavioral change even then they built loads of, of
wind turbines and solar pans. They built huge amounts,
you know, they invested trillions in this not small
amounts of money, trillions of euros phased out their
coal fired power stations, phased out the nuclear power
stations. What happened? I mean, everybody knows what happened
by now, which is that your grid will fail
like you and they did actually have to tell
people in certain regions that they had to ration
how much, you know, how long they could be
in the shower for things like that. Uh Which
I think actually just turns people against um clean
energy or climate action because they don't like, they
don't like that and it, and it upsets their
lives, but mainly it's a case study to show
you can't do it with the entire grid. You
just can't, nowhere's been able to, and they really
did try, they did put the money into it.
They did have the best storage. They did set
up all the poles and wires, they put all
that money into it and it's not cheaper than,
than if they put that money into nuclear. It's
just not if they had put that money into
nuclear, they'd have clean, reliable energy. Um, AND people
wouldn't have to ration. Um, AND they would, the
grid would be clean, but now instead they've had
to reopen their, their, um, mothballed coal fired power
stations. And as we've all seen, you know, now
they're mining for, for, for lignite, which is the
dirtiest fuel, right? It's the dirtiest coal, uh, which
is terrible. It's ter, it's terrible for, um, you
know, the fact that they had, they had clean
power stations, legal power stations and out of fear
of a tsunami, you know, because of what happened
Fukushima. Um THEY, they shut them all down. But,
but that, you know, I think in a way
that had to happen because it is a case
study for the world now where the people like
me who used to say, well, nowhere's tried doing
it can now say whoa, whoa, whoa, we tried.
You can have 15 or 20% of wind and
solar on your grid. You can, if it's hydro,
obviously, you could have a lot more. But for
wind and solar, that's the limit, the rest needs
to come from somewhere else. And you need to
be honest about that's either going to be fossil.
Well, it's always going to be nuclear and you
can't, you can't say it's neither. Um So that's
where the technology is at. And I, and I
honestly don't believe that it, that it can, that
problem will be solved by better technology. I think
that technology is the best that we're going to
to get. And there are also drawbacks obviously in
how much land they require. Um YOU know, nuclear
requires a very small amount of land for, for
the amount of energy it produces. But, you know,
it's complicated. You know, if, if you're reusing land,
that's just, it's not used for anything fine but
don't bulldoze trees to build, you know, to build
solar farms. Some places are doing that. Uh I
think, I think when the hyper focus becomes on
just emissions that's also a problem. We need to
think about biodiversity as well and longevity of the
resources. So you think, you know, a power plant
is going to last at least 60 years. Whereas
the turbines, solar panels we need replacing in about
25 nobody thinks about this or about the cost
in turn, by having to replace them. So there's
a lot of different factors. But environmentally nuclear is
the cleanest healthiest solution for the planet. And that's
why I advocate for it. It's purely my reasoning.
Mhm. So you're also interested in ethical parenting? What
is that about? And how does it tie to
uh, environmentalism?
So, um, so initially when I started out with
that, you know, and I wrote that book, it
was because, um, I'd become a parent and the
books that were on the market for green parents,
for people who cared about environmental issues were full
of nonsense, like, full of pseudoscience, honestly, like, don't
vaccinate your kids, um, at all. Um, YOU know,
um, don't, um, don't, don't drive, I mean, I
don't, I don't drive but there were a lot
of, there were a lot of things that they,
these books, um, argued for that were just impractical
for most parents, like, and actually, it's being a
non driver has had some significant challenges, but mostly
they were just, you know, also I would say
it's not always true, it's not always true. But,
you know, if, if you think about most people's
daily lifestyles. We rely on a lot of different
things. Right. Like we rely on being able to
get from A to B, we have to do
school runs, we have to choose how we feed
our kids. And a lot of these books were
just throwing rubbish out there saying, you know, here's
the diet that you need to give your child
or you should have. Here's the way you should
even just how you should give birth. A home
birth is natural. Don't give, I mean, I know
it, it probably sounds extreme to you, but this
was what I was coming across again and again.
And so I kind of put those books aside
and said, every single book that I looked at
at that time was saying these and I thought
it was dangerous. And actually, by the way, I
would love to know who's crunched the data to
say that homebirth is more environmentally friendly than, you
know, than, than a hospital.
But I mean, I also don't understand the old
bit about
why, why do they come? Right. So that's why
I kind of, I broaden it. I'd say it's
ethical her. But I, but then they're saying it's
unethical to, to give your baby an injection. And
then I would ask, well, are you saying that
they should have no medicine? Well, and actually, actually,
some of these books actually did say that they
said hoop the natural remedies. I mean, it's dangerous.
Honestly, some of it is really dangerous and you'd
be surprised at how many people follow this advice
because the books scare them. You know, I read
the books with a huge prince of salt. Like
this is a true, you know, they're saying that
my baby would die if they have too much
paracetamol. That's not true. You know, I mean, you
know, give babies paracetamol but, you know, when they're
older cow or whatever, the branded version for kids.
So what I did, so I went, what I
did was decide someone needs to put out a
sensible book that actually meets the concerns these people
have of green or ethical parity and maybe just
define it a little bit. So I did actually
look into things like the emissions caused by having
a homebirth versus, you know, a hospital. But it
is, I mean, it's negligible, right? Because there's just
too many different factors involved. But all right, people
would say one's natural on the other. But then
I would say, well, then you're saying it's natural
for a lot of babies to die in, in,
in childbirth and it's fine, it is fine to
have a hummus to put that out there. But
what annoyed me was the amount of misinformation about
it but also kind of the pressure, you know,
from these groups and books, the pressure to do
X because it supposedly is more ethical and moral
um and more environmentally friendly somehow. So I went
away and I crunched the numbers and then some
things, there was a lot of data, for example,
nappies, you know, there's data on, on cloth nappies
versus with regular nappies. But actually if you, there
are still ways to use cloth nappies, like if
you're regularly tumble, drying them and things like that,
that makes them less environmentally friendly than disposable. So
I did, I, I crunched, I crunched all the
data on that. And I, and I, there's a
chapter on each thing and even just traveling the
travel bit, I've kind of said, you know, if
you really want to give up your car, there
are different ways you can um the different kinds
of bikes you can use for kids like ir
real kind of detailed deep dive. But mainly the
thing for me was to get people to think
about those nuanced opinions rather than what they're being
fed in these books, which I honestly think are
quite dangerous. And at the time, there wasn't anything
like it. That was the first kind of book
of its kind. And actually I had to, I
had a discussion with my uh publisher about it
because I wanted a chapter on vaccines. And they
said, wow, does that really fall under this? And
I said, but the thing is all the competing
books, do they do discuss vaccines? But it's all
negative. It's saying there's so much mercury and, and
autism and all this terrible stuff. That isn't true.
Right. That vaccines do not cause autism and even
if they did autism is not like, you know,
a disease that is so evil. Like some people
are autistic. It's ok. You know. Anyway, I, I
really didn't like the way these books talked about
those people. So II, I wrote it and I,
and I actually had a huge, I had a
huge backlash to that chapter about vaccinations. Huge. I
had a, I had hate mail people leaving me
one star reviews just because of that chapter. I
even had people saying, hey, I liked all the
other chapters pro you know, cos obviously they agreed
with it but not, I don't like this. I,
I had a little bit of push back on
the home but saying no, it definitely is better
and f you know, fine, some people aren't going
to change their minds. But I hope that it,
I think it did provide something for other people
like me who just genuinely, you know, we just
care about these issues and we think, oh, well,
I'll just get this book. It's in the library
or it's got good reviews in the Guardian. I
read it because because of that and then they,
they'd open it and they'd get lots of misinformation.
And no, I think misinformation is a problem everywhere.
But the main issue is when it's not counted
because then you just won't even see that. It's
misinformation, you have to be able to see counter
arguments, even if you then fall on this side
of the argument. Fine. You've made up your mind
but you have to be able to see it.
So, what I did was put that stuff out
there at a time when no one was really
doing it in those spaces. Um, SO, yeah, that's,
you know, and now I would say now it's
changed my opinions of what it means to be.
An ethical parent have changed a lot. You know,
I, my parents are, my kids are aware of
climate change but they, they're not, they're not anxious,
they're not anxious kids. They don't have e anxiety,
they're not like the end of the world is
happening. They're very aware of solutions and they think
around the problems. And I think I actually, we
really need younger generations to be doing that because
they will inherit quite a lot of problems as
they grow up. And we don't want them to
just freeze and say we're doomed and give up.
We want them to, to be really interested in,
in the solutions. Um And I think that's actually
for me, that's the more ethical way of doing
it. But, you know, ethics, ethics is a very
broad term and it means something different to everybody
and it's not, it's not, it's not data driven,
but that book is 100% data driven. I mean,
I read like 200 studies that are referenced in
the back in the back where I said I
have actually looked at these things that these other
books are saying and here is what, here's what
the science says and you can go away and
make up your own mind. But yeah, mainly it
was, it was a response to the, to the
prevailing kind of consensus of books out there that
I wrote that.
No, it really baffles me how so many environmentalists
activists particularly use the label natural as if anything
that's natural is good when disease is natural, death
is natural when it comes to birth. I mean,
infant mortality is natural as well. A mother mortality
or female mortality. So, I mean, I just,
it's interesting though because that it really, I think
influences a lot of people who, um, who don't
hold those beliefs in an extreme way but, but
it's, they've heard it so much that even so
that's why even a lot of people are people
who don't know a lot about electricity or electricity
generation. They will think, oh, well, isn't wind and
solar more natural? And I said, well, all of
it requires mining and materials and a workforce and
you know, people constructing that, you know, it's not,
you're not just getting energy from the sun, you're,
this is, this is, these are big pieces of
infrastructure and they say, oh, I hadn't really thought
about that, but I always think it's interesting that
they've assumed it's more natural and I don't know
why it would be more natural than, for example,
splitting the atom. Um It's a real, it's really
just an ideology that seeped into quite a lot
of people's thinking until it's challenged again, that misinformation
just lives in there, kind of rent free. And
then when it's challenged, a lot of people will
say, oh, yeah, I didn't think of that, but
it's amazing to me how far that natural terminology
has gone. Same with GMO S, right. It's another
thing I talk about, people say, oh, well, they,
they're not, they're not natural. And I said, well,
why don't they cause XYZ problems? Well, no, you,
you have food on your plate because we have
GE gene editing genetic, you know, we should be,
we should be thankful for this, this is a
good thing. But again that these fear, fearful stories
and ideas of what's natural versus what isn't really
seeped into people's brains. But actually, if you look
at around you, nothing is natural. Nothing, not even
landscapes, you know, not even, I mean, not even
the hillsides and that we've engineered our entire environment,
right? We, we're really honest about it. Um, AND
that's ok because that's if, if we do it,
surely it is natural. We're part of nature. That's,
that's the arguments I make. But you have to
do a lot of thinking to get there, I
think. And, uh, yeah, a lot of people just
land on this old idea of. Uh, IN fact,
I saw something recently, which I thought was interesting,
which is a you gov poll. It's like a
independent data survey here in the UK. And it
asked people, um, if they thought, you know, previous
generation life was better for previous generations. A lot
of them said, you know, no, you know, a
lot to be fair, you know, 70% no life
is better now. But you'd be surprised. A chunk
of people that said life was better in the
17th century and the 18th century, you'd be surprised.
You know, and I know I've known those people
so I believe it. But I could see a
lot of people in the comments on this, this
uh this data, like who believes that what? You'd
be surprised. A lot of these really hardcore environmentalists
or activists that is really what they believe. They
re, it's not a myth to say they think
we should go back to living on the land
in poverty. They, they really think that's better for
the planet and for, well, not for people but
for the planet.
Yeah. May maybe they should go back to and
to a gathering because agriculture is also not natural.
Well, you know, some of them, I mean, again,
I maybe I've known the more extreme wing but
I, some of them do you know? So I
know someone in London, uh who was a spokesperson
in the rebellion who is not on the grid.
He has solar panels when they run out. He
has, he just lives without, he doesn't use a
flush toilet. He uses his garden and he has
a compost loo and um he doesn't have a
fridge. So cos you know, he, he has, he,
he lives with internet. So his view is everyone
could live like this because I live like this.
My view visiting there was um nobody wants to
live like this. Like I have relatives in India
living in poverty who are forced to live like
this, who do not want to live like this.
But also it's a very high maintenance lifestyle. This
idea that it's like slow and natural and lovely
is not like he's having to do a lot
of work. Um And a lot of mental labor
I would say to, you know, if you buy
butter, how long is it going to last for
without a fridge? You know, when can he cook?
It can only cook it when there's enough solar
generation. So he's going by the weather and fine,
that's his lifestyle. But he lives a very middle
class lifestyle. He's able to do that because he
doesn't, you know, he's paid off his house and
he doesn't have a job and he doesn't have
Children. That's not most people, most of us cannot
live like that, you know. Um So yeah, it's
this real bubble of and I would say there
are very privileged kind of wealthy people who are
doing it so we can do it. Everyone can
do it. Um, I can tell you a funny
story. Years ago I got, I got invited to
meet to, um, go see these hippies out at
this place called Stewards Wood. So they're basically, there's
a national park here where I live, um, called
D Dart. No, Ma Dartmoor National Park. And they
set up camp there and the council wanted to
evict them because it's a to live there. And
they said, well, we've got in the land, we're
living on the land and there was a legal
case and you know, I was in with the
hippies. So all the hippies say it's, it's outrageous.
They shouldn't kick them off. They're living sustainably. So
I thought I'm gonna go down there and I'm
going to write an article, I'm gonna help the
cause. So I went down there to write an
article and help the cause I was absolutely heartbroken
because they were not living off the land. They
were getting huge grocery deliveries from Tesco, you know,
from, from Sainsbury's huge deliveries that would have to,
they'd have to pay for extra petrol because they
had to come so far out in the middle
of nowhere. Um They, they, yeah, they had a
few chickens, they had a few chickens, they had
a few eggs from, you know, they were growing
a few vegetables very little though. Very little of
it. Um Fine. They were using water from a
nearby river. Ok. Fine. So they weren't connected, they
weren't connected to the grid at all. So they
were doing little bits and pieces. But I would
say their carbon footprint was way higher than anyone
living in a city. I mean, while I was
there interviewing one of them, this guy's name was
Merlin. Right. I was interviewing him. What's the lifestyle
like? Why should you be allowed to stay here?
He said he had to like answer the phone.
He said his mum had, his mum was here.
So I went out to have a look and
his mum had come to pick up his laundry
to take it home and wash it in a
washing machine and dry it in a tumble dryer.
I'm not exaggerating. This is a true story and
bring it back. So, and she had to dry
from the city. So it was a 40 minute
drive each way. She's washing and tumble, drying it
because they didn't have a way to wash clothes.
They didn't want to spend all day washing clothes
and then drying damp clothes indoors. I mean, it's
very wet here. So you'll be lucky if you
can dry them outdoors. Um And, and every few
days she'd do this. So they all had this,
this whole community was relying on ordinary civilization but
claiming, oh, we're off grid and we don't need
any of that. So as soon as I saw
it was a lie, I didn't write about it
at all. Um, AND I was nice enough not
to go away and write a horrible piece about
it. Um, BUT that's what I, that's what I
saw from that community and I think, you know,
it's a lie. Really, isn't it? Even the people
that have the means and the energy and time
to do it, they're not able to do it
and they were eventually evicted simply because they were
told if they could show that they were living,
you know, sustainably within certain parameters, they actually might
be able to stay and they couldn't meet those
parameters because they couldn't sustain a lifestyle themselves. They
couldn't provide them, they couldn't provide enough food for
themselves. They couldn't. So, and who, who was picking
up their waste? The council was having to pick
up their waste. So when you live in ordinary
society, you have to pay right in my tax
money, it comes out, they pick up my recycling
and my waste. Well, they were, they were basically
refusing to do that because they were living on
the land saying we're sustainable, but they were just,
it was piling up. So the council had to
pick it up. So there were a lot of
problems there. We kind of go if only there
was a solution to this. It is, it's called
living in this city where I live. All of
these problems are solved and my carbon program is
much lower, much lower because, you know, it's just
much lo, uh, yeah, anyway, many different reasons. But
especially the f, the food, you know, and actually
I get my, some of my vegetables I get
from a local farm which is fairly sustainable because
they drop them off to a farmers market, which
they do every week. Anyway, lots of people pick
up the food there and that, you know, in
a small way, I do that. Uh I, I
think it's better. I'm supporting the local farmer. I
know the guy. He's a great guy, but that's
not gonna feed everyone. I'm not under an illusion
that just because I got a little bit there,
it is gonna feed everyone in the same way.
We can't be in an illusion just because it's
really windy today and we have lots of wind
power that's gonna be every day forever. The amount
of journalists that were saying that was shocking to
me because they were saying this is the future
and I was like, what do you know about
the future that it's gonna be windy every day?
You know? Do you know that about the future?
What they were saying was, if we build more,
we'll get more. But that's not, that's not how
it works, right? Because we're not controlling the weather.
I know you understand that. But these, you know,
quite high fi genist didn't understand it. So I
had a few conversations with people about it, but
that's where, you know, the nuance of the conversation
needs to happen and it's not happening. And I
really think we need to move forward into that
bit because you can't implement solutions if you're still
stuck on myths, uh essentially believing myths.
So just to wrap up our conversation, let me
ask you one final question. So when it comes
to climate change and the ways we can tackle
it, of course, we talked here a lot about
technological solutions. But of course, there would be other
kinds of systemic solutions through politics, regulations and all
of that. But uh I mean, another set of
solutions that we've also touched on and many of
the activists focus the most on uh occur at
an individual level like changing some of our habits
and all of that. But I mean, that, that's
all great and it's great when people do that.
But at the same time, sometimes it seems that
activists tend to be a little bit more realistic
when it comes to, oh, you should do this,
you should stop doing that and so on. And
they think that we can solve most of the
issue if people just stopped, I don't know, driving
or using or started using evs or uh taking
shorter showers or something like that. So uh how
do you balance perhaps uh or what do you
think is most important here? I mean, what we
can do at an individual level or on a
systemic level.
So, I mean, on an individual level, I don't
think it makes that much difference. Most of these
things just don't, I mean, yeah. All right, switch
to an ev drive a bit less, get a
bike fine. There's still really small amount and I
know what people say. If everybody does it, it's
more, again, they're doing that in Germany, they still
need a lot of electricity and they're still having
to use coal to power that. So we have
a case study. I'm not saying we shouldn't do
these common sense things and some things are more,
more um some things are more obvious than others.
So one thing that we don't talk about enough,
I think is insulating houses. So in the UK,
you know, we have really terrible insulation, the house,
the homeowner has to pay for it. So there's
no real incentive, but a lot of houses are
drafty. Um And cost a lot of money now.
All right, fine. If the homeowner could put up
money, they will do it because it will save
them money in the long run because they have
less damp and they use less electricity. But actually
a lot of people are landlords, a lot of
people are renting from landlords and the landlords have
no incentive to do it. There's some things like
that really simple, which they have done well in
Germany to incentivize or provide money for, um, or,
you know, loans for people to be able to
do that. It's a really obvious thing because we
are just leaking heat. We're, we're wasting heat, you
know, uh, in quite a dominantly cold country. I
know it's not as cold as other countries but
it feels like it's very cold here all the
time. Um, AND we do have very drafty damp
houses so that, that's, you know, a simple thing.
Um There is a move towards electrification that does
need to happen. And again, I know a lot
of people don't like the idea, but it just
does need to happen. It's common sense. We need
to electrify everything and then we need to have
a clean electricity grid. That's, that's a big chunk.
It's not all of the problems, it's a big
chunk of the problem. But in terms of individual
actions, honestly, I would say talking about the solutions
is really important. Um And fighting for solutions is
really important because historically, we've always had people that
fight on the basis of problems. That's what activists
do, right? You find the problem and you focus
on the problem that doesn't solve the problem. And
you know that what you need is the instigators
and the change makers who actually care about the
evidence, care about the scientific solutions to push those
words and you have got people doing it. Some
really important people like James Hanson, um you know,
the grandfather of climate change as people like to
call him. He, he's a big advocate for nuclear
na. And one of the things he says is
that to young people, his message to young people,
the most important thing you do um is work
in the nuclear industry. That's what he said. Um
Which, yeah, ok. We need engineers and builders and
my, my thoughts and wishes are not going to,
to solve today's problems. It is the engineers and
the builders that are going to do it. Politicians
can make sure those things are implemented and that
we, we can use that as a pressure point.
So in terms of in individual action, we should
have those conversations with politicians. I'm not saying send
your MP hate mail. I'm saying have conversations because
a lot of them um actually when I started
talking about, about nuclear, I reached out to a
lot of them here, journalists, editors, politicians, and actually
a lot of them said privately they already agreed.
And I said, well, why don't you write or
talk about it or the public doesn't want to?
So, ok, I'm gonna go and commission some, some
data here and find out what the public wants.
Ok. It's come back and it said actually, they
really support this. Will you talk about it now?
And then they started to, but they only know
um what the public thinks about often. They don't
look, they're not even looking at data points, right?
They're not scientifically literate people. They're just looking at
their emails and when they open their emails, they
get 50 people saying I hate the fact that
you're putting in an EV pump in my area.
They think nobody wants this. We shouldn't do this.
We sh you know, that, that really is how,
that, that's, that's a, you know, one of the
flaws of democracy, that's just how it works. It's
people powered, but it's all the negatives. So we
really need people to send in those emails and
say, actually, I think this is a really good
idea that you have a low traffic neighborhood, for
example, or that you're putting in the EV pumps
or you know, what measures are you taking practical
measures? And do you support clean energy? Um Even
if it's not in your region, it's important that
people are talking about it and know what solutions
are. And I speak to some quite high level
individuals who don't know and they'll literally uh hop
on a call and they'll say, can you explain
to me why we need nuclear? I mean that
that's where we're starting. Um What's wrong with what's
wrong with coal? All right. OK. Um You'd be
surpri you'd be surprised. I'm not talking about ordinary
lay people. I'm talking about people in high positions
of power. So those conversations are so important and,
and it also, so my, my answer to your
question is talk about solutions because also um there
is so much hyper focus on the negatives and
the problems and that's still really prevalent. And then
when you do hear solutions like, hey, we're excited
cos it's so windy today. They're false, they're false
solutions because it's simplified. It makes a good story
or a good slogan. Well, the solutions aren't actually
good stories and slogans are really quite complicated. So
we need people who talk about the nuance and
the data and talk about it to key figures
like local representatives, you know, use a demo democratic
process um or get, get involved, go to meetings
and have a voice. Um AND, and speak to
different audiences, you know, speak to speak to people
who maybe aren't that interested in electricity, but they
care about climate change cos they're not, that's not
being added up. They just think. Well, I, I
use my bike today so it's fine. Well, actually
the, the systemic problems are far bigger, much bigger.
Um And if we implement big solutions, then that's
gonna have way more of an impact than, you
know, um putting on one less wash cycle a
week, that's just the truth, isn't it? You can
still put on one lash wash cycle a week
if you want to. But all of us doing
it isn't going to, it isn't going to make
her dad right on, on the emissions. It's just
not going to make a dent. What's going to
make a dent is we'll bring lots of clean
energy. That's, that's it and then electrifying as much
as we can so we can get off the
re the remaining fossil fuels. Um It's not a
complicated message, but it's still a message that needs
to be put out there because it's um I
think it's not um it's still not countering that
apocalyptic dude. My narrative enough.
Great. So let's send that message. And where can
people find you on the
internet? Like I was, I've done a piece on,
on uh the need for gas in low income
countries, things like that. Um And they're heavily referenced.
So, you know, don't, you don't have to take
my word for it on these calls. I always
say anything that I say in any podcast interview,
you can go and have a look at the
article and you can click the links and it
will take you to the source and you can
look at the data and I urge people to
do that because I think a lot of people
get um you know, like uh they feel like,
oh with science, it's too complicated. It's not for
me. And I said that that's not true. You
know, anyone can understand some of these really basic
concepts. You just need to know where to look
and to understand the difference between, you know, um
some, it's some blog post that, that says, so
it's, you know, uh the sun is causing climate
change and the sun will fix it whatever arguments
people are making. Um And actually look at oh
our wood and data or the IPCC or, you
know, any the, the UN data or anywhere that
puts out really good numbers. Um AND good summaries
of those for the people that aren't so mathematically
inclined as well. But yeah, I would urge people
to have a look.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description of the interview and Z and thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been really, really fun to
talk with you.
Thank you. Thanks for having me. It's been great.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s
Friends, David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter Rosman Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt.
Pavlo Stassi Alek Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of
Z and YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lati Cortez or Scott
ZFTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior
old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neon, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon Bendik Mueller, Thomas Rumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin
John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.